TRUEVISION TGA(tm) UTILITIES PACKAGE - March 26, 1990


The TGA Utilities Package contains three separate programs that can be
used to manipulate image files that have been saved in the Truevsion
TGA format.  This format is documented in the Truevision TGA File
Format Specification Version 2.0 and is available from Truevision, Inc.

The three programs provided are:

        TGADUMP.EXE -   displays on the console device a description of the
                        various fields contained in a Truevision TGA file.
        
        TGAEDIT.EXE -   provides the ability to examine and modify the
                        contents of various control and informational fields
                        within a TGA file.  Can also be used to convert an
                        old style TGA file into the new extended TGA file
                        format.

        TGAPACK.EXE -   can be used to convert an uncompressed image file
                        into a run length compressed image file, and vice
                        versa.  Also provides an option to convert a 32
                        bit uncompressed image into a 24 bit uncompressed
                        image by deleting alpha channel data.


TGADUMP takes an optional filename as an argument.  If the filename
does not include an extension, TGADUMP will search for file with the
base name specified, and one of the extensions: ".TGA", ".VST", ".ICB",
".VDA", or ".WIN".  If the command is executed without an argument,
the program will prompt for a filename.  TGADUMP does not modify the
contents of a TGA file, but provides a means to identify various
characteristics of a TGA file without the necessity of a TARGA or ATVISTA
videographics adapter.

TGAEDIT was designed to convert an image file from the original TGA format
into the extended TGA format.  TGAEDIT accepts one or more filenames as
arguments, and will search for default extensions in a manner similar to
TGADUMP.  If more than one filename is provided as arguments, TGAEDIT will
process each in sequence.  By default, TGAEDIT will display the contents of
informational fields found in the input file, and will prompt the user for
any changes desired.  Simply entering RETURN or ESC at each prompt will leave
the value of the field unchanged.  The output file created will be in the
extended TGA format, and by default, will contain a 64x64 postage stamp.
Various options are available with TGAEDIT to modify this default
behavior.  If the -noprompt option is provided, TGAEDIT will process the
file converting it to the extended format without prompting the user
for field values.  If the -noextend option is provided, the program will
convert an extended TGA file back to an original TGA format.  Various
other fields of the extended TGA file are copied to the output file by
default, but this behavior can be suppressed by providing one of the 
following options:

        -nocolor omits the color correction table from the output file
        -noscan omits the scan line table from the output file
        -nodev omits the developer area from the output file
        -nostamp omits the postage stamp from the output file

Many of the control fields designating the size of the image and the pixel
depth are not readily available for editing since changing these values
would change the interpretation of the image data.  The ability to edit
these fields is provided; however, by specifying the -all option.  If an
option is provided that is not understood, the program displays the legal
options; therefore, executing the command:

        TGAEDIT -help

will result in a display of the recognized options.

The TGAPACK program can be used to process original TGA image files.
This program was written to address a potential problem with run length
encoded images that were created relative to the original TGA specification.
In that specification, run length packets and raw packets could contain
data that actually wrapped from one edge of the image to the other.  This
characteristic is not allowed under the new TGA specification.  Packets in
a run length encoded file must end with the last pixel of a scan line.  This
is necessary to support features such as the scan line table.  There then
needs to exist a way to convert a run length encoded file saved under the
less restrictive characteristics of the original TGA specification into
a run length encoded image under the current TGA specification.  TGAPACK
can be used to accomplish this by first uncompressing the image data, and
then processing the image file a second time, but requesting that the data
be compressed.  As with TGAEDIT, TGAPACK accepts one or more filenames as
arguments, and it will search for various extensions if they are not
provided with the filename.  If the -unpack option is specified, TGAPACK
with uncompress a compressed image file.  If no option is specified, the
program will convert an uncompressed image file into a compressed image file.
TGAPACK also provides one other option for use with uncompressed 32 bit
per pixel images.  When the -32to24 option is specified, TGAPACK will
process the image data stripping out the alpha data, thus converting the
file to a 24 bit per pixel TGA file.  As with TGAEDIT, if an unknown option
is provided, a summary of the options is displayed on the console.

As an example of how these utilities can be used together, suppose we
had an original 32 bit compressed TGA file named IMAGE.TGA that we wanted to
convert to the extended format and include a postage stamp.  The following
command might perform this operation satisfactorily:

        TGAEDIT -noprompt image

If successful, the resulting file named IMAGE.TGA will be a 32 bit compressed
image in the extended format, and will include a postage stamp.  The original
file is deleted if the conversion is successful (i.e., the output file
replaces the input file).  If a problem occurred during the processing
(e.g., the run length encoding did not conform to the new specification),
the original file is preserved and an error message is displayed.  At this
point, we would need to recompress the file to conform to the current
specification.  This is accomplished by the following commands:

        TGAPACK -unpack image
        TGAPACK image

The newly compressed file can now be processed by TGAEDIT to create the
proper postage stamp entry and convert the file to the extended format.
If we had wanted to remove the alpha data from the image and create a
24 bit per pixel TGA file, we needed to process the file one more time
using TGAPACK:

        TGAPACK -unpack image
        TGAPACK -32to24 image
        TGAPACK image
        TGAEDIT -noprompt image

Of course, if we had wanted to examine the effects of these changes at
any point in the process, all we needed to do is examine the file control
information using TGADUMP.


Two additional utilities are provided to allow the display of postage
stamp data on an ATVista or on a TARGA.

TSTAMP          - TARGA Stamp displays postage stamp on Truevision TARGA.
                  The program loads data directly from the file with no data
                  padding, so that 16-bit TGA files are displayed on a Targa16,
                  24-bit TGA files will be displayed on a Targa24, etc.
                  The source code is provided, and requires the TARGA Tools
                  version 4.0 to be rebuilt.  Note that the function
                  UnPackBu will need to be changed from the 4.0 version.
                  Refer to the comments in the TSTAMP program.

VSTAMP          - ATVista Stamp displays postage stamp on Truevision ATVista.
                  This program is based on the Truevision STAGE Toolkit, and
                  requires the STAGE driver and server files distributed with
                  the ATVista Demo Disk version 2.0.  You must have the STAGE
                  Toolkit version 2.0 to rebuild this program.

Additional files provided with this package are sample image files that have
been created with various pixel depths in both uncompressed and compressed
formats.  Some of the file names and associated descriptions are as follows:

        UCM8.TGA        - Uncompressed color mapped 8 bit image
        CCM8.TGA        - Compressed color mapped 8 bit image
        UBW8.TGA        - Uncompressed black & white 8 bit image
        CBW8.TGA        - Compressed black & white 8 bit image
        UTC16.TGA       - Uncompressed True Color 16 bit image
        CTC16.TGA       - Compressed True Color 16 bit image
        UTC24.TGA       - Uncompressed True Color 24 bit image
        CTC24.TGA       - Compressed True Color 24 bit image
        UTC32.TGA       - Uncompressed True Color 32 bit image
        CTC32.TGA       - Compressed True Color 32 bit image


Truevision Software Development Team
